Monthly report for July 2024 (#10)
cardano-scaling/website: monthly/2024-07-monthly.md

### Distributions

#### 2423.0

We have released the new Mithril distribution [`2428.0`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/releases/tag/2428.0). This distribution includes several critical updates and enhancements:
- Support for **Cardano node** `9.0.0`.
- Database cleanup and optimization once per epoch.
- Bug fixes and performance improvements.

#### Future distributions

![](img/2024-07-mithril-distributions.png)

We have planned to release two new distributions in August:
- `2430` (before the **Chang** hardfork):
  - Activation of the certification of **Cardano transactions** in the `release-preprod` network.
  - Support for **Cardano node** `9.1.0` on **all networks**.
- `2434` (after the **Chang** hardfork):
  - Activation of the certification of **Cardano transactions** in the `release-mainnet` network.

### Protocol status

Here is the status of the Mithril protocol on the Cardano `mainnet`:
![](img/2024-07-mithril-protocol-status.png)

### Transaction verification in Nami

TODO
- demo created by Blockfrost
- make status clear; i.e. this is/was only an experiment
- serving certificates through blockfrost?
- include video (hosted on youtube, loom, ipfs?)

> 

Reviewer: As Blockfrost now supports the Mithril endpoints within their API, they have presented an implementation example.

- The demo shows transaction verification within the Nami light wallet (using Blockfrost as its backend).
- This allows the light wallet user to verify that their transaction is on-chain with the high certainty provided by Mithril security.
- While it is just an experimental implementation, it might be accepted by the Nami upstream in the future.

![https://ipfs.io/ipfs/bafybeiayaxyr6b442sz22n4ag5hfwjjnym2bwd4rpdzha3stdhrkbhzxye?filename=demo_blockfrost_mithrill_support.mp4](https://ipfs.io/ipfs/bafkreifxrd7pcby47ruutcdvjsv2q6tggfs7dnij2ve2brdzwcucoq6g7e?filename=ezgif-6-c33802f259.gif)

Author: Let's make you an author and you commit to this PR directly (or PR from a fork with this commit)? Gave you write access.

Author: I've pushed a commit with you as author.

---
title: July 2024
slug: 2024-07
authors: [ch1bo, jpraynaud, mmahut]
tags: [monthly]
---

> This is a monthly report on the progress of 🐲 Hydra and 🛡 Mithril projects since June 2024. This document serves as a preparation for and a written summary of the monthly stakeholder review meeting, which is announced on our Discord channels and held on Google Meet. This month the meeting was held on 2024-07-22 using these [slides][slides] and [you can see the recording here][recording].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a monthly report on the progress of 🐲 Hydra and 🛡 Mithril projects since June 2024. This document serves as a preparation for and a written summary of the monthly stakeholder review meeting, which is announced on our Discord channels and held on Google Meet. This month the meeting was held on 2024-07-22 using these [slides][slides] and [you can see the recording here][recording].
```

## Mithril

[Issues and pull requests closed in July](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2024-06-30..2024-07-31)

### Distributions

#### 2423.0

We have released the new Mithril distribution [`2428.0`](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril/releases/tag/2428.0). This distribution includes several critical updates and enhancements:

> - Support for **Cardano node** `9.0.0`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Support for **Cardano node** `9.0.0`
```

> - Database cleanup and optimization once per epoch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Database cleanup and optimization once per epoch
```

- Bug fixes and performance improvements.

#### Future distributions

![](img/2024-07-mithril-distributions.png)

We have planned to release two new distributions in August:

> - `2430` (before the **Chang** hardfork):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `2430` (before the **Chang** upgrade):
```

Reviewer 2: It is just to be consistent, in the explainers and other reports we have created, we used Chang's upgrade. So the suggestion was just to ensure that the wording stays consistent across the board.

Author: @oduameh but consistent to what? In our codebase, issues and documentation we usually called it a hard fork. If you have any concrete guidance you got, please refer us to that.

>   - Activation of the certification of **Cardano transactions** in the `release-preprod` network.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Activation of the certification of **Cardano transactions** in the `release-preprod` network
```

>   - Support for **Cardano node** `9.1.0` on **all networks**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Support for **Cardano node** `9.1.0` on **all networks**
```

- `2434` (after the **Chang** hardfork):
  - Activation of the certification of **Cardano transactions** in the `release-mainnet` network.

### Protocol status

Here is the status of the Mithril protocol on the Cardano `mainnet`:
![](img/2024-07-mithril-protocol-status.png)

### Transaction verification in Nami

As Blockfrost now supports the Mithril endpoints within their API, they have presented an implementation example.

> - The demo shows transaction verification within the Nami light wallet (using Blockfrost as its backend).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The demo shows transaction verification within the Nami light wallet (using Blockfrost as its backend)
```

> - This allows the light wallet user to verify that their transaction is on-chain with the high certainty provided by Mithril security.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- This allows the light wallet user to verify that their transaction is on-chain with the high certainty provided by Mithril security
```

> - While it is just an experimental implementation, it might be accepted by the Nami upstream in the future.

Author: ```suggestion
- While it is just an experimental implementation, it might be accepted by Nami upstream in the future
```

![https://ipfs.io/ipfs/bafybeiayaxyr6b442sz22n4ag5hfwjjnym2bwd4rpdzha3stdhrkbhzxye?filename=demo_blockfrost_mithrill_support.mp4](https://ipfs.io/ipfs/bafkreifxrd7pcby47ruutcdvjsv2q6tggfs7dnij2ve2brdzwcucoq6g7e?filename=ezgif-6-c33802f259.gif)

### Transaction certification

We have kept working on the implementation of the Cardano transaction certification with Mithril and we are currently working on the rollout of the feature to production:

> - We are finalizing the minimization of the signer footprint on the SPO infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We are finalizing the minimization of the signer footprint on the SPO infrastructure
```

> - We are preparing for activating the feature in the `release-preprod` network with the following release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We are preparing for activating the feature in the `release-preprod` network with the following release
```

> - We are preparing thorough documentation about the mechanism used to certify the transactions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We are preparing thorough documentation about the mechanism used to certify the transactions.
```

- We have selected final parameters for signing the transactions:

>   - `100` blocks from the tip of the chain (`~30 minutes`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `100` blocks from the tip of the chain (`~30 minutes`)
```

>   - `30` blocks between snapshots certifying the transactions (`~10 minutes`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `30` blocks between snapshots certifying the transactions (`~10 minutes`)
```

>   - With these parameters, we can consider the transactions final with very high probability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - With these parameters, we can consider the transactions final with very high probability
```

>   - These parameters are hot parameters that can be adjusted without requiring a new distribution

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - These parameters are hot parameters that can be adjusted without requiring a new distribution.
```

![](img/2024-07-mithril-cardano-tx-roadmap.jpg)

### Decentralized Message Queue CIP

> We have kept working with the Cardano networking team to design a mechanism to implement a decentralized message queue which can be used in particular to decentralize the signature diffusion from Mithril signers to Mithril aggregators based on the Cardano network layer. The idea is to create a separate process for the decentralized message queue implementation:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have been collaborating with the Cardano networking team to design a mechanism for implementing a decentralized message queue to decentralize the signature diffusion from Mithril signers to Mithril aggregators based on the Cardano network layer. The idea is to create a separate process for the decentralized message queue implementation:
```

> - New dedicated process (aka "Mithril network node") which will be based on Ouroboros network stack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A new dedicated process (aka "Mithril network node") based on the Ouroboros network stack
```

> - Bring a more efficient handling of resources consumptions (network and CPU) and avoid impact on the Cardano node performance of availability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- More efficient handling of resource consumption (network and CPU) and reduced impact on the Cardano node performance and availability
```

> - Have a better security (as there will be no impact on the Cardano node).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Enhanced security with no impact on the Cardano node
```

> - Both nodes will have a different release pace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Different release pace for both nodes
```

> - Both nodes will be bundled in the Cardano node distribution release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Both nodes will be bundled in the Cardano node distribution release
```

> - A hard fork for SPO registration of the port of their Mithril network node is likely to be needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- A hard fork for SPO registration of the port of their Mithril network node is likely needed.
```

![](img/2024-07-mithril-cardano-decentralized-message-queue.jpg)

## Hydra

[Issues and pull requests closed in July](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+sort%3Aupdated-desc+closed%3A2024-06-30..2024-07-31)

![The roadmap with features and ideas](./img/2024-07-hydra-roadmap.jpg)
<small><center>Snapshot of the new [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/1) with features and ideas</center></small>

Notable updates on our [roadmap](https://github.com/orgs/cardano-scaling/projects/7/views/1) this month are:
- Completed incremental decommits, to be released separately as `0.18.0` after some remaining cleanup tasks and documentation updates
- Release `0.19.0` will be incremental decommits and, depending on the hard-fork date of Cardano mainnet, switching to Conway on the Hydra L2 ledger (see [March 2024](./2024-03#conway-support) for more details)
- Refined scope of "what is Hydra V1" through the Hydra working group
  - Added [SDK for wallet integration with Hydra #1509](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1509) to provide a better developer experience

>   - Decided to implement [Directly open heads #1329](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1329) and [Partial fanout](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1468) to overcome our [known issue & limitations](https://hydra.family/head-protocol/docs/known-issues/) and supersede several other 💭 ideas.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Decided to implement [Directly open heads #1329](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1329) and [Partial fanout](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1468) to overcome our [known issue & limitations](https://hydra.family/head-protocol/docs/known-issues/) and supersede several other 💭 ideas
```

>   - Prioritized [Optimistic head closure #198](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/198) higher based on user feedback.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Prioritized [Optimistic head closure #198](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/198) higher based on user feedback
```

  - Declared [React to protocol parameter changes #195](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/195) as not essential for a V1.

### Incremental decommits completed

This month we finally finished the implementation of the [Incremental decommit #1057](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1057) feature.

> As one can tell from the feature description on GitHub, the number of comments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As evident from the GitHub feature description, the number of comments
```

> and linked pull requests, this was by far not a trivial change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and linked pull requests, this was a complex change.
```

> Last month we wrote about why versioning the `open` state on-chain is needed and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Last month, we discussed why versioning the `open` state on-chain is necessary and the 
```

> that we needed to change the specification and implemention. After doing that in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subsequent changes to the specification and implementation. After addressing these in
```

The working group started work on the first item "What is Hydra Head V1" and
gathered valuable feedback in discussions between fellow layer 2 architects and
Hydra users.

Notable inputs were the need for an SDK, wallet integration and the ability to
operate without a full cardano-node, which got captured in
[hydra#1509](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1509) and
[hydra#1305](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/hydra/issues/1305) respectively. Even brand new ideas emerged from these discussions like "resumable Hydra heads".

The immediate goal is to achieve a common understanding of what must be included for a Hydra Head V1 and consequently when/how this could be audited?

Discussions also revolved around discoverability of Hydra heads, specifically, but also general interoperability with off-chain ledgers (any layer 2). In that regards, the group is considering to work on a [CPS/CIP](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs) in the mid term.

## Conclusion

The monthly review meeting for July 2024 was held on 2024-07-22 via Google Meet,
presenting these [slides][slides] and this [recording][recording].

> Most likely due to summer breaks, we have not had many community members joined us on the review meeting this time. It was nontheless great to have Blockfrost demonstrate their experiments in using mithril certificates delivered through Blockfrost in a forked Nami version. This demo really makes it clear how light clients can benefit from Mithril verifiable transactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Despite the likely impact of summer breaks on attendance, it was great to have Blockfrost demonstrate their experiments using Mithril certificates delivered through Blockfrost in a forked Nami version. This demo clearly illustrates how light clients can benefit from Mithril verifiable transactions.
```

> On the Hydra side, we are very happy that we could finally get incremental decommits merged and ready to be released. While it took some time, this was the first substantial feature that was not really covered by the original Hydra Head paper and proves that the protocol can grow and expand into what users will need. We appreciate all the great input from the Hydra working group on which features we should build next and its exciting to see the community interest in Hydras future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the Hydra side, we are very pleased to have successfully merged and prepared the incremental decommits feature for release. Although this process took some time, it marks the first substantial feature not originally covered by the Hydra head paper, demonstrating the protocol's capacity to grow and meet user needs. We appreciate all the valuable input from the Hydra working group regarding the features we should develop next and are excited to see the growing community interest in Hydra's future.
```
